A box plot.
Sometimes called a box-and-whisker
plot is a method of showing
aggregate statistics of various
samples in a concise matter.
The box plot simultaneously shows, for
each sample, the median of each value,
the minimum and maximum of the samples,
and the interquartile range.
Let's create three different
samplings from NumPy.
One for the normal distribution.
One for random.
And one from a gamma distribution.
Next, let's put those
in a pandas DataFrame.
After all, much of the data we would
actually process would come from pandas or
another data manipulation toolkit and
not from NumPy distribution functions.
Now we can use the pandas described
function to see some summary statistics
about our data frame.
Each row has 10,000 entries.
The mean values and
standard deviation vary heavily.
The minimal and
maximum values are showing, and
there's three different percentage values.
These percentage values make up what's
called the interquartile range.
There are four different
quarters of the data.
The first is between the minimal value and
the first 25% of the data.
And this value of 25% is
called the first quartile.
The second quarter of data is between
the 25% mark and the 50% of the data.
The third between 50 and 75% of the data.
And 75% mark is called the third quartile.
And the final piece of data is between
the 75% and the maximum of the data.
Like standard deviation, the interquartile
range is a measure of variability of data.
And it's common to plot
this using a box plot.
In a box plot, the mean, or the median,
of the data is plotted as a straight line.
Two boxes are formed, one above, which
represents the 50% to 75% data group,
and one below, which represents
the 25% to 50% data group.
Thin lines which are capped are then drawn
out to the minimum and maximum values.
Here's an example.
We'll create a new figure.
Then we call plt.boxplot, and we pass in
the column that we want to visualize.
In matplotlib,
data needs to conform to NumPy arrays.
But pandas is built on top
of NumPy data points, so
this is as easy as projecting
the column that we're interested in.
Finally, we set the whis
parameter to be the range.
This tells the box plot to set the whisker
values all the way out to the minimum and
maximum values.
Also, I am going to assign the output
of the box plot function to a variable,
which is just an underscore.
Now this is either horrendous or
beautiful, depending on who you are.
You see, underscore is actually
a legal name for a variable on Python.
But it's also completely uninformative.
It's common practice by some to use an
underscore when unpacking values which you
don't care about and won't use later.
I am using it here because if we don't
assign the return value of plotting
function to a variable,
the Jupiter Notebook will assume
that we wanted to print that output.
Since plotting functions return
a list of all of the artists plotted,
this would really muddy up our display.
It's up to you whether you want
to use this underscore pattern or
not in your own code.
Great, this gives us a basic box plot.
Now let's add the other two samples to it.
Unfortunately we can't just pass a whole
pandas data frame to matplotlib.
Instead we need to pull out each column
and send them in as a list of values.
All right,
that gives us our three distributions.
Now, we didn't normalize the scale,
so that's a little wonky.
But if we look at the gamma distribution,
for instance,
we see the tail of it is very, very long.
So the maximum values are very far out.
Let's take a look at this
by itself in a histogram.
Interesting, we see it starts
at a moderate level, spikes up,
then drops off much more gradually and
does indeed have a very long tail.
Let's add this to our box plot.
Curiosity and to demonstrate
something called inset axes.
Recall that we have one
figure with one subplot.
Since we didn't do anything
fancy with subplots,
that means we only have one axes object.
We can actually overlay an axes on
top of another within a figure.
Now, this functionality isn't in
the basic matplotlib space, but
it's in the toolkits,
which tend to ship with matplotlib.
There are several different
toolkits available, and
while they tend to be packaged,
they aren't considered core.
The toolkit that we're going to
use is called the axes grid,
and we import it from
the mpl_toolkits.axes_grid1.inset_locator.
We create a new figure and
we put up our box plot.
Then we just call the inset locator and
pass it the current axes object we want
composition on top of,
followed by the size of our new axis.
And we can specify this
as both a width and
a height in percentage
from the parent axes.
Then we give it a number from the place
in which we wanted to drop the new axes.
This isn't quite as flexible as with grid
spec where we're essentially trying to
connect the plot to one of
ten different locations.
I'll put in position two here,
which will place the axes in
the upper left of the figure.
Then we just push a histogram to that
axes and it behaves as we would expect.
We've a little clash on the yaxis but
that's easy enough to
flip on the inset plot.
We just access the yaxis of the plot and
call tick_right.
And there we are.
An inset plot showing a distribution as
a histogram layered on top of a box plot.
Now, the box plot has a few more functions
which are worth investigating before we
finish this lecture off.
First, if you don't
supply the whis argument,
the whiskers actually only go out to
halfway between the interquartile range.
You can figure that out through the top of
the box minus the bottom of the box and
times that value by 1.5.
This is one method of detecting outliers.
And the points which are plotted
beyond the whiskers are called fliers.
You can see how this method of outlier
detection differs with respect to our
three distributions.
You can also plot the confidence interval
in a couple of different ways on the data.
The most common is to add notches to the
box plot representing the 95% confidence
interval of the data and there are lots
of other ways to customize the box plot.
The box plot is one of the more
common plots that you might use as
a data scientist.
And matplotlib has significant support for
different kinds of box plots.
Here the matplotlib documentation is key.
You can find links in the course
resources to the API,
which describes the box
plot functionality.
I've got one more plot to show you.
A two dimensional histogram which
is better known as a heat map.
Then we'll look at a couple more
advance features of matplotlib.
And I'll see you in the next lecture.